On behalf of the governing body and all of those working at the World Headquarters of Jehovah's Witnesses,
it's my pleasure to welcome you to the 2022 Pursue Peace Convention.
These convention segments, which constitute special editions of JW Broadcasting this month and next,
have been translated into more than 500 languages.
The scripture theme for this session and the next is Psalm 2911.
Jehovah will bless his people with peace.
As you watch the following music video presentation, notice the peace we find by observing Jehovah's
creations, reading his word and sharing his message with others.
Please enjoy the presentation.
I start my day when I wake up from the sun.
I walk through the streets, the eyes of the sun.
I pray, I pray, to the passing.
In prayer, we hope.
I stop the rest in the rest of my watch.
This is what I choose.
What I want, I'm ready.
I finish my day when I sleep.
I pretend that I don't seem to enjoy my life.
I pray that I give Jehovah's Witnesses.
We are delighted you could join us
for the opening session of the Pursue Peace Convention of Jehovah's Witnesses.
Let's sing together song number 86 entitled We Must Be Taught.
That's song number 86.
What kind of peace does God give and to whom does He give it?
Brother Stephen Let, a member of the governing body of Jehovah's Witnesses,
will answer these questions in the opening talk of our program.
Please pay close attention as He develops the theme,
Jehovah is the God who gives peace.
It is my great pleasure to warmly welcome all of you and to say,
Shalom.
Why is saying that appropriate?
Well, Shalom is the Hebrew word for peace,
and it occurs over 200 times in the Bible.
When His use is a greeting, just as I used it,
it means, may you have peace.
So what could be a more appropriate way to greet all of you
at the start of this Pursue Peace Convention of Jehovah's Witnesses?
We are very pleased that you're with us,
and we assure you you will not be disappointed.
To the contrary, you'll be glad you were able to devote three days to learning
what the Bible says about how to gain and maintain peace in all areas of your life.
But now, let's begin by talking about the person who has drawn us all together
for this convention, Jehovah, and how we delight in talking about our marvelous Heavenly Father.
Philippians 4.9 caused Jehovah the God of Peace.
Nice true He possesses many qualities, love, justice, wisdom, power,
but He also possesses the quality of peace.
If you think about it, He is at peace with Himself,
at peace with angels, at peace with faithful humans.
Yes, He is the God of Peace.
But here's a question, does Jehovah keep this peace to Himself?
Well, let's get the answer, Romans 15.
Romans 15, and please, let's read verse number 33.
May the God who gives peace be with all of you, amen.
So He generously gives this peace as we'll be discussing.
In fact, He gives every good gift, every perfect present according to James 117.
And one of His finest presents is the gift of peace.
But now here's another question, what kind of peace does Jehovah give?
Well, many equate peace with freedom from conflict and strife in one's life.
But the peace Jehovah gives is a lot more than that.
Peace that only Jehovah can supply brings in feelings of safety, security, well-being.
This Jehovah-given peace is described very nicely in Philippians chapter 4.
Let's go there.
Philippians 4, beginning in verse 6.
Do not be anxious over anything, but in everything by prayer and supplication,
along with thanksgiving, that your petitions be made known to God.
And the peace of God that surpasses all understanding will guard your hearts
and your mental powers by means of Christ Jesus.
So notice, Jehovah is saying, do not be anxious over anything.
Would Jehovah tell us to do something it was impossible for us to do?
No, but obviously he's talking about not being overly anxious.
Controlled anxiety can actually be beneficial.
It can move us to show concern for others.
It can motivate us to work enthusiastically to accomplish an assignment.
But now what about excessive uncontrolled anxiety?
Well, I can lead to physical problems. Depression can be crippling,
debilitating, infebling.
But now how can we avoid being overly anxious over anything?
The answer is given in the next words of Philippians 4, 6, and 7.
After telling us not to be anxious, Jehovah gives the antidote.
He basically tells us to pray, supplicate, petition him, and we will get that peace of God.
But now what does the Scripture mean when it says that this peace of God
surpasses all understanding?
Well, we could say that it's so amazing, so powerful, that we limited humans cannot fully understand it.
It defies logic from a human standpoint.
Our hearts and minds may be filled with so much worry, fear, anxiety.
We see no way out, but we beg Jehovah for the peace that he can supply.
And then what happens?
Our minds and hearts amazingly are filled with calmness, security, tranquility.
Lorraine, a young girl whose mother was dying of cancer, said this.
I was in the room when my mother took her last breath.
I asked Jehovah to give me this strength to endure and to get through this.
Immediately I felt the peace of God.
But now what is meant by the expression, the peace of God will guard your hearts and your mental powers.
Well, the Greek word translated guard is a military term that evokes a mental picture of soldiers maintaining a day and night watch.
In the same way, see this peace of God can act like a 24-hour guard over our hearts and mental powers, keeping them calm, secure, and tranquil.
Now here's a question, what is the key ingredient to are being able to receive this miraculous peace of God?
The answer, having a close friendship with Jehovah.
The Apostle Paul experienced firsthand many times that having inner peace depends not on circumstances, but rather on a close personal relationship with Jehovah.
For example, on one occasion, because Paul and Silas boldly preached, they had their garments ripped off of them.
They were beaten many blows with rods.
They were thrown into the inner prison. Their feet were fastened in stocks.
But in the middle of the night, what if Paul and Silas began to do?
They began to pray and sing songs of praise to Jehovah.
In amazement, all the other prisoners were listening to them.
So obviously, their very, very unfavorable circumstances had not robbed them of their precious peace of God.
So let's learn this valuable lesson from Paul and Silas.
Having the peace of God is not dependent on our circumstances, but it is dependent on having a close personal relationship with Jehovah.
Thus far, we've discussed how Jehovah is a God of peace, who gives peace, and we've talked about what kind of peace he gives.
But now we ask to whom does Jehovah give peace?
The simple answer is, Jehovah gives peace to those who draw close to him and want to follow his guidance.
So receiving peace from Jehovah starts with living a clean life following Jehovah's righteous moral standards.
Many people in Satan's world, as you know, believe that God will accept them as they are, that God in effect will lower his standard to accommodate them.
Can you imagine such pride?
That would be like a pot telling its maker, the potter, how the pot must be used, and the potter must accept this whether he likes it or not.
Well, we know it doesn't work that way, does it?
We have to come up to Jehovah's righteous standards.
Now he'll help us, but we do the changing, certainly not, Jehovah.
Interestingly, James chapter 3 verse 17 says that the wisdom from above is first of all pure, then peaceable.
So if we want peace from Jehovah that will result in peaceful lives, we must be pure according to Jehovah's moral standards.
Isaiah 48-22 reads, there is no peace, says Jehovah, for the wicked, or put another way, those who wickedly set their own moral standards will receive no peace from Jehovah, and will not have peaceful lives.
But we work hard to live about Jehovah's standards.
Now, it's true, Jehovah does his part to help us, but he does expect us to do our part.
We could say that his blessing on our effort is somewhat like multiplication.
What do we mean?
Well, if we put forth no effort, there's nothing for Jehovah to multiply.
See, what is 10 times 0?
0?
100 times 0. A thousand times 0. A million times 0. We still have 0.
So if we don't do anything, Jehovah has nothing to multiply.
Galatians 5-22 tells us that peace is an aspect to the fruitage of the Holy Spirit.
So the Holy Spirit will help us cultivate and demonstrate peace.
In fact, John 1426 describes the Holy Spirit as a helper.
But that expression helper doesn't indicate it will miraculously do the job for us with no effort on our part.
Illustrate this if we can.
Imagine that you're working very hard to paint the outside of your house.
And a good friend comes to help you.
Now you're painting together. But then you decide, I'll just go back in the house, and I'll just take it easy.
Well, how long will your friend keep painting?
If he continued painting, he's no longer a helper. He's doing the job for you.
Luke 1113 tells us that Jehovah will give Holy Spirit to those asking him for it.
So if we ask for Holy Spirit and then do our very best to work in harmony with that helper, we will enjoy peace with God.
And we will enjoy and promote harmony, unity, and good relations with others.
And what a pleasure it is to associate with those who display peace, this important aspect of the Spirit's fruitage.
When a sleeping baby is suddenly awakened in the middle of the night by a loud noise, he becomes frightened, doesn't he?
And he cries out for help. But when a parent cuddles him and sues him with reassuring words, he calms down immediately.
Well, David, at Psalm 55, 16 through 18, said that when he was troubled, he called out to God, and that Jehovah heard his voice and gave him peace.
Like David, when we're in anguish, we can supplicate our Heavenly Father, and he will soothe and restore our peace.
In fact, our loving Father is eager to do this for us. Open up to Jeremiah 29, and notice he's eager to replace our anxiety with the peace from him.
Jeremiah 29, 11, for I will know the thoughts that I am thinking toward you, declares Jehovah, thoughts of peace, and not of calamity, to give you a future and a hope.
And you will call me and come and pray to me, and I will listen to you.
In that beautiful, our God is ready, willing, and able to replace our anxieties with this amazing peace that only he can give.
Well, we've now discussed how Jehovah is the God of peace. We've discussed who he gives the peace to, to those who draw close to him, and earnestly seek peace from him.
But now, let's examine how each of us can promote peace with others.
In the following video, Brother Kenneth Cook of the Governing Body will explain how this convention program will help us to pursue peace.
On behalf of the Governing Body, I can say that we really appreciate your attending this pursued peace convention.
Speaking of peace, we love the serene setting here at our World Headquarters on Blue Lake in New York State.
At times, the water is as smooth as a mirror.
We occasionally see eagles and hawks fly by, and in the fall of the year, when the leaves change colors, the forest can look spectacular.
More important than this tranquil setting, though, is the abundant peace that Jehovah has given to his organization.
We can say this because of the peace and harmony that unite us, no matter what our nationality, language, race, tribe, or social background is.
This is truly spectacular, especially when we consider all the turmoil in the world, and how divided people are politically, socially, and religiously.
However, we cannot take our beautiful peace for granted. It's not maintained automatically.
Each of us personally must pursue peace in order to have God's approval.
Jehovah certainly wants his worshipers to enjoy lasting peace.
That was true in ancient times. God told Moses to have the priests in Israel bless the people with very reassuring words.
Notice these words that we find at Numbers 6 verses 24 through 26, and hear what the priests were to say to the people.
May Jehovah bless you and safeguard you. May Jehovah make his face shine upon you and may he favor you. May Jehovah lift up his face toward you and grant you peace.
The next verse states, and they must place my name upon the people of Israel that I may bless them.
Jehovah has placed his name on us too, and he is richly blessing us.
Let's consider what this convention program is going to cover, so that we'll know how we can continue to enjoy God's blessing of peace.
First, we'll consider how to be at peace with God.
Our greatest peace comes from having a personal relationship with Jehovah.
Making him our best friend benefits us and leads to peace in every other aspect of our life.
How can we reach out for a close relationship with God?
We need more than a superficial knowledge of him. We need to get to know Jehovah as a person and admire his qualities and ways.
Then we can love what he loves and hate what he hates.
During this program, listen for details about Jehovah that will draw you ever closer to him.
Second, we'll consider how to be at peace with others.
Our home should be havens for peace for our families.
This means more than the absence of arguing. It involves putting the interests of our family members ahead of our own.
As we'll learn from this program, that includes showing love and respect to one another, working as a team, improving family communication, and worshipping Jehovah together.
Third, we'll consider how to be at peace despite trials and troublesome world conditions.
During this convention, we're going to tour the world to see how despite opposition, illness, economic problems, and natural disasters, our brothers really care for one another.
How they receive help from Jehovah's organization and how they continue their spiritual activity.
No matter what may threaten our lives or livelihood, we can be confident that Jehovah can help us get through it and retain our peace of mind and heart.
Fourth, we'll consider how to enjoy peace eternally.
Once God's kingdom has lifted mankind to perfection, we'll no longer have to pursue peace.
As Psalm 72 verse 7 promises, the righteous will flourish and peace will abound until the moon is no more.
In other words, there will be peace forever.
This program will help us to anticipate future blessings from Jehovah.
Can you see why pursue peace was well chosen as the theme for this year's convention?
To pursue something means to chase it in order to capture it.
Because of the influence of Satan, his wicked world, and our own imperfections, peace is constantly trying to elude us.
Therefore, we have to chase after it to capture it in our lives.
This convention program will help us do that.
May the God of peace be with all of you now and forever.
That's the heartfelt wish of all of us on the governing body because we love you dearly.
Please enjoy the entire convention program.
We warmly thank Brother Cook for highlighting some of the ways this convention program will help us
to pursue peace.
But now, let's briefly preview the convention program that is coming our way that has been provided by the God of peace.
And you may want to follow along by using your copy of the convention program.
You'll note day one has the theme Jehovah will bless his people with peace.
The first symposium will illustrate how love for God, love for neighbor, and love for God's word lead to genuine peace.
This year's dramatic Bible reading is based on the life of Jacob.
And as you will see, Jacob gives us an excellent example as to how we can pursue the things making for peace.
Thereafter, though we'll have the talk, the result of true righteousness will be peace.
And we'll see in that talk how we can resist temptation.
Just as a lion devours pray and assimilates it into his body,
Satan tries to get us to succumb to temptations so he can devour us and assimilate us into his world.
But during that talk, we'll learn how to reject his temptations.
Then in the second half of day one, we'll enjoy our second convention symposium,
take delight in God's promises of peace.
We will be greatly heartened by Jehovah's promises of peace found in the book of Isaiah.
For example, one of the talks has a theme, the wolf and the lamb will feed together.
Today, we can even imagine feeding a wolf and a lamb together.
If we tried such, it would likely result in lamb shops for the wolf.
But Jehovah's promise in Isaiah assures us that peace will exist between humans and animals and between animals and other animals.
The third convention symposium has the thought-provoking theme,
follow the roadmap to family peace.
We'll learn how despite challenges, marriagemates, parents and children can successfully follow that roadmap to family peace.
Then we'll enjoy the talk, loyally support the Prince of Peace.
That talk will remind us of the importance of maintaining our neutrality by not taking sides on political issues.
To conclude day one, we'll have the intriguing talk,
do not be misled by imitation peace.
It will contrast the world's so-called peace,
with a genuine peace that Jesus will give his followers.
But then day two, notice the theme?
Be found spotless and unblemished and in peace.
The second day starts with a symposium designed to invigorate us for our ministry,
so that we can be ready to share the good news of peace.
That will be followed by the talk, young people choose a path that leads to peace,
and that talk will encourage our dear young ones to pursue the full-time ministry.
And we want to say to you, dear young ones, if you do this,
you will enjoy a happy life and you will have no regrets.
Next, we will see a video that shows how our brothers around the world are continuing their spiritual activity
and are enjoying peace despite difficult trials.
Again, a highlight of the day will be the baptism of new disciples of Jesus.
In the baptism talk, the baptism candidates will be encouraged to go on walking in the way of peace.
And why? Because this is truly the best way of life.
Two more symposiums will use video dramatizations
to contrast traits of peace records with the qualities of peace makers.
And what a stark contrast between the two, you'll see in these symposiums.
It's kind of like the contrast between bitter and sweet.
Part one of this year's Bible drama will remind us of ancient examples of God's people
who pursued peace and will definitely be able to relate to their examples
and relate it to our current situation in life.
The day will conclude with showing us how to safeguard our unining bond of peace.
We'll see how we can do so by putting the application of Bible principles
always ahead of following local culture and traditions.
Now, day three, the theme, may the God who gives hope fill you with all joy and peace.
The opening symposium will examine seven examples of ones who sowed peace and reaped peace.
We will examine Joseph and his brothers, the Gibbonites, Gideon, Abigail, Mothibbusheth,
Paul and Barnabas, and modern examples.
We truly hope that many accept our invitation to hear the enlightening public Bible discourse
entitled Friendship with God How Possible.
Now, if we think about it, we're not born as friends of God
because we're born as sinful offspring of Adam.
Actually, we think about it, we're born as enemies of God.
Sometimes you'll hear people say of a little baby, look at that little angel.
But more accurate would be to say, look at that little enemy of God.
Now, of course we love that little baby, and it's not hopeless
because our loving creator has made reconciliation with him within the reach of everyone.
We can become a good friend of God, and that close relationship with Jehovah
will become our most valuable possession.
But then, after we enjoy part two of the Bible drama,
the concluding talk of this convention will fill our hearts with a joyful prospect
that universal peace is sure to come.
It's guaranteed by the God who cannot lie.
Finally, we'll join in singing a beautiful new original song,
and we'll close with a prayer appraise to Jehovah, the source of peace.
So dear brothers and sisters, there's a brief synopsis of our wonderful three-day convention
provided by the God of Peace that is coming our way.
And throughout, the program will be enhanced with dozens of videos.
And we'll see our brothers, either in real-life settings,
or dramatizations that we'll definitely be able to relate to.
In fact, the following video is a little small sampling of the videos
you will see during this convention.
Hey, everyone who just walked in.
Olivia, today's poll was she ever.
No, she would never. She's in April.
She wanted to go up to the girls and smash their phones.
Neutral, ain't no neutral. You're just a coward.
Take a trash.
Why was feeling back then was just sadness.
Never really peace.
Hello, everyone. Haley from Genoa Design here.
Is there just a little bit of envy in there?
In June of 2018, a huge group of armed men came to us.
They represented the ideals of my childhood.
Do you have any idea what this is going to cost us?
I didn't have a choice. You went behind my back.
Where's your mask?
Do you know how many people have actually gotten sick?
Zero.
That's what always happens when you're just about to lose all your strength.
Jehovah does that something for you.
I'm so grateful that we made peace.
Before the world turned upside down.
But here's an important question for all of us.
Will we prepare our heart to receive God's peace during this convention?
Ezra chapter 7 verse 10 tells us that Ezra prepared his heart
to consult the law of Jehovah and to practice it
and to teach it to the Israelites.
Now, what was it resolved?
Verse 11 tells us he became an expert in the study of the commandments of Jehovah.
Well, in imitation of Ezra, how can we prepare our heart
for what we're going to take in at this convention?
Well, for one thing, very important, by prayer and meditation,
we can make sure that our heart is ready, receptive
to receive Jehovah's instruction,
and we can also make sure that in our heart,
we are determined to apply what Jehovah teaches us.
But then another thing we can do,
we can pay close attention to the music video presentations
that will be shown before every session of the convention begins.
Now, these presentations have been carefully crafted
to help prepare our heart for each session.
Much time, effort and expense has been expended
in preparing these beautiful presentations.
So please listen carefully as the sounds and scenes
prepare your heart to accept the spiritual instruction
that will follow.
Yes, may each of us be determined to listen attentively
to what Jehovah is teaching us.
May we be determined to imitate the Psalmist
who humbly stated at Psalm 85 verse 8,
I will listen to what the true God Jehovah says
for He will speak peace to His people.
If we do, we will learn how to pursue peace with all people
to the praise of Jehovah, the God of peace,
who blesses His people with peace.
Yes, we will be successful in pursuing peace
until we no longer have to pursue it.
Now, what do we mean?
Well, think about it.
Does Jehovah have to pursue peace?
Does he have to chase it in an effort to try to catch it?
No.
Jehovah merely displays peace.
Well, in the New World, what a wonderful time it will be.
When we no longer have to pursue peace,
but like Jehovah, we can merely display peace.
But right now, let's be determined to continue to pursue peace
and may this wonderful convention that is coming our way
help us to do so.
Thank you, Brother Let, for helping us prepare our hearts
for the rest of the program.
We are ready for Jehovah to teach us how to pursue peace.
How is peace related to love?
How can we show love?
And what blessings result when we do?
The first symposium of this convention
will answer those questions.
Brother Seth Hyatt, a helper to the service committee
of the governing body, will begin with the talk
how love leads to genuine peace.
Love for God.
What do you think?
Is there a connection, a relationship between love and peace?
And if so, what role does love play in achieving genuine peace?
The Bible helps us to appreciate that love is an essential element
in achieving genuine peace.
So we're interested in showing love.
As students of the Bible, we know that humans were created
in the image of God.
And as a result, you and I have the ability to show love.
But we also know that we live in a world that has a very distorted
view and definition of love.
That, combined with our own imperfection,
means that if we're not careful, our view of love can become distorted.
So how do we guard against that?
By allowing Jehovah to teach us how to love.
And when you think about it, what better teacher could we have?
The Bible says that God is love.
That means that Jehovah, our Creator, who knows us better than we know ourselves.
Who embodies, who personifies love, is willing to teach us how to love.
And how does he do that?
Well, by means of his word, the Bible.
And by means of his own beautiful example, as we get acquainted with Jehovah,
we learn what love really is.
And as we put that love to work, as Jesus did,
then we're in a position to enjoy genuine peace.
In this symposium, we're going to explore how love for God,
love of neighbor, and love for God's word, the Bible, can lead to genuine peace.
First, let's talk about love for God.
How important is that if we want to enjoy genuine peace?
Well, Jesus provides some insight and a statement he made that's recorded in our Bibles at Matthew 22.
Let's look at it.
Matthew chapter 22, and we're going to read verse 37.
Now, to provide some context for these words, Jesus has been asked a question by a man who is well versed in the law.
What is the greatest commandment in the law?
Notice how Jesus responds.
He said to him,
You must love Jehovah your God with your whole heart and with your whole soul,
and with your whole mind.
This is the greatest and first commandment.
You must love Jehovah your God, a command.
Love for Jehovah is essential.
It has to be the most important relationship in our life, more important than any human, more important than anything.
We want to love Jehovah to what extent?
Well, Jesus says with your whole heart.
Now, what does that involve?
The context of Jesus words helps us to understand that he was talking about a person's feelings, emotions, desires.
So does love for God involve our emotions?
Absolutely.
But it has to involve more than a simple affection for God.
Why do we say that?
Well, what did Jesus say next?
With your whole soul.
That is with your entire being.
We use everything we have to praise Jehovah and to prove our love for Him.
But even more is involved.
Jesus concludes by saying with your whole mind.
So our intellectual faculties are involved.
We're willing to take the time to get to know Jehovah's thinking and make it our thinking.
We want to think the way Jehovah thinks.
We want to understand his purpose and his requirements for us.
And we want to understand his personality.
Now, when we think about that kind of love,
it's clear that it encompasses our thoughts, our words, and our actions.
Nothing is left out.
And that kind of love provides a basis for a friendship with God.
And that results in peace with God.
So there we see the progression.
Loving Jehovah with our whole heart, soul, and mind leads to peace with God.
And as we enjoy peace with God,
we can also enjoy inner peace and peace with those around us.
Now, how does that work?
Well, our love for Jehovah motivates us to imitate Him.
And we cultivate the qualities that Jehovah displays.
For example, patience, kindness, mildness,
qualities that make us attractive to others,
and qualities that promote peace with others.
I'm sure you would agree that we want to be at peace with God.
But sometimes our peace can be threatened.
We may experience pressure.
We may be the subject of some wrong, some injustice, some evil,
that threatens our peace.
And then the question is,
will we handle things in a way that is pleasing to Jehovah?
Or will we become impatient or try to take matters into our own hands?
In the following dramatization, notice how a family
draws strength from a Bible account that highlights love
and respect for Jehovah's sovereignty.
Thank you.
Okay, Mom, I'm going to preach.
See you.
Bye, Mom.
Love you.
Have a good day.
She's wild.
Oh, yeah.
She does.
Okay, I'm totally posting that.
Do it.
Okay, it's us.
I'm just going to.
Hey, everyone.
Brooke here.
And Amanda.
Guess who just walked in.
There's Jake.
Today's poll, would she ever?
No, she would never.
She's an angel.
I think it's all an act.
You know she's wild.
Oh, she saw it.
I was relieved.
I don't even think she likes guys.
What if she's into girls?
Everybody is getting it.
I bet she's still a virgin.
Hey, can I see that?
Yeah, of course.
Here you go.
Enjoy life forever.
Now, how are you going to do that?
Well, that's a very good question, actually.
I don't know.
Oh, not God, you.
What are you doing?
Me?
Well, I try to help others.
Try?
Man, all you do is stand next to your little car
while the rest of us stand up for your rights, bro.
Well, I'm actually neutral.
Neutral?
Ain't no neutral.
You're just a coward.
Take a trash.
How did it go?
It was a tough day at the car, but I'm okay.
Olivia?
What's wrong?
Would she ever?
No, she would never.
She's an angel.
You know she's wild.
Oh, she saw us.
I'm so sorry that happened to you.
You know, it reminds me of a situation Paul was in.
I think it was Acts chapter 16, in verse 23.
After they had inflicted many blows on them,
they threw them into prison and ordered the jailer
to guard them securely.
Because he got such an order, he threw them into the inner prison
and fastened their feet in the stocks.
But about the middle of the night,
Paul and Silas were praying and praising God with song.
And the prisoners were listening to them.
What do you think made them want to sing?
They loved Jehovah.
And when they focused on that, how do you think they felt?
I think they felt some peace.
That's right.
How about we dig a little bit deeper?
Well, what did you notice?
Gabe and Olivia are under pressure.
Olivia in the classroom?
Gabe at the witnessing cart?
How will they handle the pressure?
In a way that preserves their peace with Jehovah?
Well, it's a good question.
And really all of us need to reflect on that question
when we're under pressure.
We know that Jehovah's way is the best way.
We're convinced that his way of ruling is the best way.
But when we're subjected to pressure,
perhaps the victim of some injustice
or even of some evil,
we may be inclined to take matters into our own hands.
And when we do,
it can jeopardize our peace.
So how do we demonstrate respect for Jehovah's sovereignty?
The inspired advice in Romans chapter 12 can help.
Let's look together at Romans chapter 12 beginning in verse 17.
Return evil for evil to no one.
So this provides the context for what follows.
We may suffer some evil.
Return evil for evil to no one.
Take into consideration what is fine
from the viewpoint of all men.
And then notice verse 18.
If possible, as far as it depends on you,
be peaceable, be a peacemaker with all men.
Now these words really heighten our appreciation
for Jehovah's reasonableness.
Why do we say that?
Because Jehovah doesn't ask us to do something that we can't do.
He doesn't ask us to control others.
No, to the extent it depends on you.
Jehovah asks that each of us control ourselves,
our response to a situation,
and to be peacemakers.
And then an explanation.
Verse 19.
Do not avenge yourselves, be loved,
but yield place to the wrath.
Why? For it is written,
vengeance is mine.
I will repay, says Jehovah.
So the advice is, be a peacemaker.
And leave wrath to God.
Let him determine if and when,
and upon whom, vengeance will be brought.
It's easy to say.
But is it always easy to do?
No.
The example of King David can be very helpful to us.
Through no fault of his own,
David became the target of King Saul's murderous hatred.
And on several occasions Saul tried to kill David.
For several years David lived as a fugitive,
but there were opportunities during that time
for David to harm Saul,
even to kill him.
He could have justified that in his mind.
But do you think, had he done so,
it would have threatened his peace,
his peace, especially with Jehovah,
we know that it would.
So how did David respond?
On one occasion he said to his men,
it is unthinkable from Jehovah's standpoint
that I should do such a thing to my Lord,
the anointed of Jehovah.
What helped David?
Well, he saw a bigger picture than David and Saul, didn't he?
He saw a picture with David, Saul,
and Jehovah.
And he knew that if Saul needed to be corrected,
Jehovah would do it in his time and way.
As a result, David was willing to be patient
and he preserved his peace,
his peace with God, his inner peace,
and his peace with those around him.
What a beautiful example.
And we can be sure that if we demonstrate our love for Jehovah,
by respecting his sovereignty,
waiting on him,
that we will enjoy peace as well.
Jehovah assures us that he will bless his people.
He will bless us with peace.
So let us be determined to love Jehovah
with our whole heart, soul, and mind,
and to demonstrate our love for Jehovah
by patiently waiting on him and respecting his sovereignty,
his way of doing things.
If we do, we will enjoy the incomparable peace of God.
Now, Brother Ralph Walholz,
a helper to the Personnel Committee,
will present the next talk of this symposium.
How love leads to genuine peace, love of neighbor.
For telling dominant traits that would exist in the last days,
second Timothy chapter three says that men will be lovers of themselves.
Is it wrong for us to love ourselves?
No, it's normal.
Even necessary to have a healthy love of oneself.
After all, Jesus said,
you must love your neighbor as yourself.
And we'll talk more about that in a minute.
However, the love mentioned here is distorted and selfish.
And because it prevents love of neighbor,
it becomes a barrier to peace.
Some Bible scholars suggested Paul put love of self
at the top of his list,
that second Timothy chapter three verses one through five,
because all the remaining negative characteristics in the list
result from it.
And those traits too are a barrier to peace.
For example,
not being open to any agreement mentioned in second Timothy chapter three and verse three,
often leads to anger, wrath, screaming, and abusive speech.
Rather than bringing peace,
such a lack of self-control stirs up strife.
On the other hand, love of neighbor has the opposite effect.
It leads to genuine peace.
Please turn to Matthew chapter 22 verse 36.
One of the Pharisees versed in the law tests Jesus.
Teacher,
which is the greatest commandment in the law?
Jesus responded with the words in verse 37,
just considered at length in the preceding talk.
You must love Jehovah your God.
But then Jesus goes beyond the original question
and quotes a second commandment.
Let's read verse 39.
The second, like it, is this.
You must love your neighbor as yourself.
Jesus is saying that the two commandments,
love of God and love of neighbor, are linked.
Now, how exactly would you define neighbor?
Please turn to Luke chapter 10.
Notice how Jesus answered this very question,
who really is my neighbor?
Jesus responds clearly with his renown illustration of the neighborly Samaritan.
In Jesus' day, the Jews disdained Samaritans.
Their attitude moved Jesus to make a powerful point.
In his illustration, Jesus said that the Samaritan took extraordinary measures to help a Jewish man.
The Jew had fallen victim to robbers,
and his own countrymen, ignoring, leaving him half dead.
What Jesus said must have stunned the audience.
Luke chapter 10 verses 33 and 34 reads,
but a certain Samaritan traveling the road came upon him,
and it's saying him he was moved with pity.
So he approached him and bandaged his wounds, pouring oil and wine on them.
Then he mounted him on his own animal and brought him to an inn and took care of him.
Jesus then asked a penetrating question in verse 36.
Who of these three seems to you to have made himself neighbor?
His words recorded in verse 37 are also directed to you and to me.
Go and do the same yourself.
Yes, our neighbors include not only our family members and our Christian brothers and sisters,
but all whom we encounter from day to day.
In other words, our love extends to those who are not of our own race,
tribe, nationality, or religion.
How do we show that love?
Please turn with me to Romans chapter 13.
Because we love our neighbor,
we avoid conduct that disrupts peace.
Instead, we strive to apply the Inspired Council at Romans chapter 13 verses 8 through 10.
Do not owe anything to anyone except to love one another.
For whoever loves his fellow man has fulfilled the law.
For the law code, you must not commit adultery, you must not murder, you must not steal, you must not covet.
And whatever other commandment there is is summed up in this saying,
you must love your neighbor as yourself.
Love does not work equal to one's neighbor.
Therefore, love is the law's fulfillment.
That means that our responsibility is to treat others in ways that promote peace.
When others treat us unkindly, we endeavor to imitate Jesus.
When he was being insulted, he did not return the insult.
When he was suffering, he didn't go threatening.
Imitating the Prince of Peace and the God of Peace gives us inner peace.
In the following dramatization, notice how a family benefits from the Apostle Paul's example of displaying love of neighbor even when provoked.
What are you going to do? You're just a coward.
Man, all you do is stand next to your little car.
You don't do anything. You just stand next to your little car.
I know neutral, rise to coward.
Gabe, what happens today?
It's just, I've been yelled at in service before, but this time I wanted to, I don't know.
I wanted to go up to the girls and smash their phones.
I'm so glad that you didn't.
Yeah, but I feel guilty because I was like, it was like so angry.
It's okay. Let's keep reading.
We have left off in verse 26.
Suddenly, a great earthquake occurred so that the foundations of the jail were shaken.
We're over. All the doors were instantly open and everyone's bonds came loose.
When the jailer woke up and saw that the prison doors were open, he drew his sword and was about to kill himself,
assuming that the prisoners had escaped.
But Paul called out with a loud voice.
Do not hurt yourself for we're all here.
So he asked for lights in Washington and seized with trembling.
He fell down before Paul and Silas.
Now, think about what the jailer had done to Paul.
He could have hated him for it.
Yeah, he could have, but I guess he saw the jailer's pain instead of just his own.
Yeah, Paul loved his neighbor.
He didn't hold back trying to save his life.
Hey, how do you get the nerve to keep coming out here?
Look, you were right.
About what you said.
No one should stand around while other people suffer injustice.
So do something. Fight like we do.
This is my way of making a difference.
The only way that I know the world can really change.
Come on, man, the Bible.
Like I get where you're thinking, but let me show you just one scripture.
All right, one scripture.
So this is a verse in the Bible that convinced me of how I can make a difference.
It's a Matthew 24 verse 14.
Here it says,
And this good news of the kingdom will be preached in all the inhabited earth
for a witness to all the nations.
And then the end will come.
In the dramatization,
Paul could have reacted in a negative way towards the jailer.
However, in spite of the way he had been treated,
he displayed neighborly love.
And this had a powerful effect on the jailer and brought praise to Jehovah.
Because we are imperfect,
we must work hard at cultivating love for our neighbor.
This is illustrated in what happened with the Apostle Peter.
Prior to becoming a follower of Jesus,
he did not have fellowship with non-Jewish people.
But after he became a Christian,
God taught him that division between Jews and Gentiles
was not to continue.
And Peter got the point.
It acts chapter 10 verses 34 and 35.
Peter is quoted as saying,
Now I truly understand that God is not partial,
but in every nation the man who fears him
and works what is right is acceptable to him.
Peter even stayed in the newly converted Gentiles home for days.
And he continued the practice of eating with non-Jewish Christians.
However, 13 years later, while in Syrian Antioch,
Peter suddenly stopped associating with Gentile Christians.
Why?
He feared the reaction of some Jewish Christians
who were slow to accept change.
This illustrates that prejudice can be deeply rooted.
It takes constant effort to read ourselves of it.
But we must learn to view others impartially as Jehovah does.
We want to treat others as Jehovah treats them.
In his sermon on the Mount, Jesus said,
You heard it was said,
You must love your neighbor and hate your enemy.
However, I say to you,
continue to love your enemies and to pray for those who persecute you.
Then, as recorded in Matthew chapter 5,
and verse 45,
He explains why we want to show that type of love,
so that you may prove yourself sons of your father who is in the heavens
since he makes his son rise on both the wicked and the good
and makes it rain on both the righteous and the unrighteous.
This love, produced by Holy Spirit,
is markedly different from the sort of love that is common in the world.
It's based on a higher principle.
Jesus said even sinners will follow a policy of like for like.
But if we want to prove ourselves sons of our father who is in the heavens,
we must be different.
We welcome others,
as God and Christ have welcomed us.
At Romans 157, the Bible says to us,
Welcome one another,
just as Christ also welcomed you.
The Greek word used there conveys the idea of receiving someone kindly or hospitably,
such as into one's home or circle of friends.
Prejudice withers as love grows.
Remember that at one time we were all strangers or foreigners,
not close to God,
but Jehovah drew us to Him with cords of love.
Christ welcomed us.
He opened the doors at were so that we could become part of God's family.
Since Jesus has kindly accepted us, as imperfect as we are,
it should be unthinkable for us to reject anyone else.
Dear brothers and sisters, divisions,
prejudice and hostility will doubtless increase in the world as we approach the end of this wicked system.
As servants of Jehovah, though,
we seek the wisdom from above which is impartial and promotes peace.
We rejoice as we forge friendships with people from other lands,
accept cultural differences,
and possibly even learn the languages of others.
When we do this,
peace flows just like a river
and justice like the waves of the sea.
We work what is good toward all,
but especially our brothers.
Love of neighbor moves us to make sacrifices in behalf of others,
and to share the good news at every opportunity,
our master, Jesus,
said,
This is my commandment
that you love one another just as I have loved you.
What are the blessings that come from love of neighbor?
Jesus answers that at John chapter 15,
and we'll read verses eight through ten, beginning with verse eight.
Number one,
My Father is glorified in this,
that you keep bearing much fruit
and prove yourselves my disciples.
The second blessing,
verse nine,
Just as the Father has loved me,
so I have loved you remain in my love.
If you observe my commandments,
you will remain in my love.
Just as I have observed the commandments of the Father
and remain in his love.
Brother Robert Soranco,
a helper to the writing committee,
will now present the final talk of this symposium,
how love leads to genuine peace,
love forgot's word.
Can you imagine a collection of some 40 million books?
They would fill more than 800 miles or 1300 kilometers of bookshelves.
And yet that is what you can find
and what has been described as
the largest library in the world,
the Library of Congress in Washington, D.C. in the United States.
Which book would you say is the most worthwhile to read
among all those millions of volumes?
We can let the Apostle Paul answer that question.
In his second letter to Timothy,
at 2 Timothy 315,
he referred to the Holy writings,
which are able to make us wise for salvation
through faith in Christ Jesus.
He was referring, of course,
to God's own written word
that we know as the Bible.
The contents of this book can give us the wisdom that we need
to gain salvation,
and that makes it the most worthwhile book on earth.
But how can a book have such a profound effect on a person?
Well, when describing books
and their authors per se,
the secular writer Gilbert Hyatt once stated,
books are not lumps of lifeless paper,
but minds alive on the shelves.
From each of them goes out its own voice,
so by taking down one of these volumes and opening it,
one can call on to range the voice of a man,
the author, far distant in time and space,
and hear him speaking to us,
mind to mind, heart to heart.
When we take this book,
the Bible down off the shelf,
and open it,
we are calling into range the voice of its author, Jehovah.
And as he's speaking to us,
mind to mind, heart to heart,
indeed he is.
For example, at Jeremiah 29-11,
Jehovah tells us,
I will know the thoughts
that I am thinking toward you,
thoughts of peace and not of calamity,
to give you a future and a hope.
And at Proverbs 27-11,
Jehovah tells us,
be wise and make my heart rejoice,
so that I can make a reply to him,
who taunts me.
How grateful we are,
that Jehovah has given us his precious word,
the Bible,
that reveals his intimate thoughts and feelings,
that draws us close to him,
and that teaches us how to gain everlasting life.
Because we love Jehovah,
we also love and cherish what he tells us
through the pages of his written word.
And that is exactly how the Psalmist felt,
who wrote the 119th Psalm,
please open your Bible,
to Psalm 119,
and find verse 161.
That's Psalm 119,
verse 161.
In the latter part,
it says,
but my heart stands in awe
of your words.
Now see what more he wrote in verses 167 and 168.
I keep your reminders,
and I love them dearly.
I observe your orders and your reminders,
for you are aware of all that I do.
This Bible writer did not view God's orders and reminders
as just a list of cold legalistic statutes.
And we can be sure that he did not consider them to be burdensome.
Instead, he knew that they formed the basis
for the best life possible.
And that is why he not only wanted to learn God's orders,
but he also desired to observe or obey them.
The Psalmists believe that God's word is the one thing
we're studying,
and that because of knowing God's orders and reminders,
we are far wiser than people
who know everything else except God's word.
Now look at what more he wrote in verse 165.
Abundant peace belongs to those who love your law.
Nothing can make them stumble.
Herein lies a major reason why we love God's word.
Abiding by it leads to genuine peace.
Everyone longs for peace in their life,
and through the pages of the Bible,
we learn how to attain it.
That is why we choose to live by God's word,
even in the face of the trials that arise in our life,
some of which may try to steal away our peace of mind and heart.
And yet, Jehovah knows what we are going through every day of our lives
and stands ready to help us.
If we love and obey Jehovah's word,
we will not be stumbled spiritually by what someone else does or says
or by any other matter or situation in life.
But how does love for God's word lead to such peace
and keep us from stumbling?
We know that all scripture is inspired of God,
making the Bible the most reliable guide for every aspect of life.
After all, his wisdom is infinitely superior to our own.
Reading the Bible enables us to look at matters
from God's elevated point of view.
It is just as the prophet Isaiah wrote at Isaiah 55,
verses 8 and 9.
If you'd like to open to that, please,
Isaiah 55, 8 and 9.
He wrote,
For my thoughts are not your thoughts.
And your ways are not my ways, declares Jehovah.
For as the heavens are higher than the earth,
so my ways are higher than your ways,
and my thoughts than your thoughts.
Just imagine,
Jehovah's thoughts and language must be vastly superior
to those of humans.
When he communicates with us as he does through the pages of the Bible,
he simplifies how he expresses his thoughts
so that we can understand them.
Then, as we take in all that Jehovah says,
we can let his thinking guide our thinking.
Reading the Bible can be likened to peering into a mirror
because its message has the power to allow us to see ourselves
as we really are.
And it shows us where adjustments are needed
in our attitude and conduct.
Thus far in this symposium,
we have seen how this can actually work.
We have seen two dramatizations of a widowed mother
using the Bible to help her teenage children avoid being stumbled
by other young people who had been harassing them.
Remember, her son Gabe had been called a coward
by a couple of tough-looking youths
while he was engaged in public witnessing.
And her daughter Olivia had been chided by other girls
for not being interested in dating one of the guys in her class.
Their mother used what Jehovah inspired the Apostle Paul to write about
with his ordeal in prison to show how he was able to preserve his peace
in a very difficult situation.
And that in turn helped Olivia and Gabe
to safeguard their own peace.
Let's see what more the mother finds in the Bible
to help Olivia avoid being stumbled into the conduct
that could rob her of peace.
Guess who just walked in?
Olivia.
And there's Jake.
We know she's what.
I don't even know if she's got it.
She's into growth.
She's still very young.
Olivia, what are you thinking?
I don't know how they can do that.
I don't even follow them.
If this doesn't stop, I don't know if I can...
You're strong.
Okay, you just can't let them get to you.
It feels out of your control, doesn't it?
Hey.
I think we need another Bible example.
Remember when we studied about the Shulamite girl?
Yeah, I remember.
And who was pressuring her?
Solomon.
But she wasn't interested in him.
Just like, I'm not interested in that boy Jake, so...
But it wasn't just him.
There were the daughters of Jerusalem and Solomon's court.
They urged her to accept his attentions.
But do you remember what she said?
In song of Solomon, chapter 2.
It says, I put you under oath,
O daughters of Jerusalem,
by the gazelles and the doves of the fields.
Do not try to awaken or arouse love in me
until it feels inclined.
So despite all of the pressure,
who was really in control?
She was.
No one was going to push her into something
that she didn't want to do.
She even said, I am a wall.
You have the same power.
And if you believe that,
it will change how you handle the pressure.
No, give me a hug.
I just posted it going like I did.
All they want is to see me give in.
Why would I give them the satisfaction?
My peace comes from doing the right thing.
Nobody can make me stumble.
And a wall.
Olivia's mother thought of another inspired Bible example
that of the Shulamite girl,
who was being urged by the young women in Solomon's court
to accept his amorous attentions.
But despite the pressure,
the Shulamite girl remained in control
for no one was going to push her into something
that she did not want to do.
Olivia got the point.
As she thought to herself,
my peace comes from doing the right thing.
Nobody can make me stumble.
I am a wall.
It is obvious that the mother had a real love for God's word.
New it well.
And calmly and skillfully used it
to guide the thinking of her children
to keep them from stumbling.
So many people these days put God's word
out of their mind to prevent it from influencing their life.
But as the world's morals decline,
we must stick loyally to God's word
to conform our conduct to his pure and holy thinking
and strengthen our determination to live
by his standards.
That is just what the Apostle Paul urged us to do
at Romans chapter 12 and verse 2.
If you would turn there please,
Romans 12 and verse 2,
Paul wrote,
and stop being molded by this system of things
but be transformed by making your mind over
so that you may prove to yourselves
the good and acceptable and perfect will of God.
God's word strengthens us to resist conforming
to the corrupting practices of Satan's world
and to suppress temptations toward wrongdoing.
Now as we prove to ourselves that the will of God is good
and perfect,
then we should also accept that loyally obeying God
is the best way of living.
There is a direct connection between
heeding scriptural teachings and obeying or enjoying
genuine peace.
However, for Jehovah's word to have such power in our lives,
we need to read the Bible every day
and meditate on why its counsel is beneficial.
That means reading it at a pace that allows us
to ponder on what we are reading.
And doing this helps to fix in our minds the portions
that are especially helpful to us.
When asked why he reads the Bible every day,
one Christian replied,
if I repeatedly pray to Jehovah during the day
and expect him to hear me,
why shouldn't I also listen to God
by reading his word every day?
If we want to be a good friend,
why would we do all the talking?
He makes a very good point, doesn't he?
Reading the Bible, we are listening to Jehovah
and that is how we get his viewpoint on matters.
So, do you allow God to speak to you every day?
We can measure how effective our Bible reading is
by the influence it has on our attitude and conduct.
When our peace is disturbed,
we can look into the source of divine wisdom for God's guidance.
Speaking prophetically of anointed Christians at Isaiah 54-13,
the prophet wrote,
all your sons will be taught by Jehovah
and their peace will be abundant.
Now, those words apply in principle
to Christ's other sheep as well.
Thankfully, when Christ's anointed brothers,
the faithful and discreet slave prepare spiritual food
for us, such as this convention program,
they hold firmly to Jehovah's word
and they never water it down.
We always receive spiritual instruction
that upholds Jehovah's high moral standards.
And we are blessed with abundant peace
when we accept Jehovah's instruction.
Isaiah penned another prophecy
that is being fulfilled today
and that we find at Isaiah 2 verses 2 through 4.
He saw in a vision of the last days
people from all the nations streaming to true worship
and for what reason?
Isaiah wrote of Jehovah
he will instruct us about his ways
and we will walk in his paths.
And in what would this result?
So that they will beat their swords into plowshairs
and their spears into pruning shears.
Nation will not lift up sword against nation
nor will they learn war anymore.
In his goodness, Jehovah is willing
to teach we imperfect humans
how to achieve genuine abundant peace,
earthwide.
And he does that through the pages
of his own written word.
What a privilege it is to be taught by our God.
No matter what problem may threaten the peace
of our personal life,
our family, or our congregation,
we are confident that the solution
can be found in the Bible.
And as we have learned from this symposium,
our continued love for Jehovah,
for our neighbor and for God's word,
will lead to our enjoying everlasting peace
in God's new world.
Thank you, brothers,
for teaching us how love motivates our pursuit of peace.
Each of us now has an opportunity
to praise Jehovah with song.
We will sing song number 24 entitled
Come to Jehovah's Mountain,
song number 24.